{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
Notes about sample ESP-r META files\
\
In the src/manual/Data_model folder are a number of sample ESP_r META files which are used to illustrate the syntax of META files within the document ESP-r_meta_file_description.troff and ESP-r_eta_file_description.pdf.\
\
The file silent_poly.txt is related to Figures 1-4 plus the listing on page 6.  The file silent_extrude.txt is based on an initial extruded floor plan.\
\
The ESP-r Project Manager can export a META file.  Look in the Mode Management -> export current model -> to ESP-r meta file.  This will generate a file with an ending .mesp.  An exported META file always uses the poly zone form and will include the most recent syntax.\
\
Expanding the information in a META file into an ESP-r model is done via a command line directive to the ESP-r Project Manager.  Below is the syntax of the prj command line which is of interest:\
\
  Use: [-mode \{text|graphic\}]\
       [-v|-vv] verbose or very verbose\
       [-file <configuration>|<silent command>]\
       [-zone <name|index>]\
       [-act \{silentread\}]\
 (where -act silentread assumes -file <name>\
  is high-level model creation directives\
  file. Otherwise the -file <name> is\
  assumed to be a model configuration file)\
\
Assume you have a META file named cellular_shd.mesp and it was located in the /tmp folder the command would be\
\
  prj -mode text -file cellular_shd.mesp -act silentread\
\
It will create a new ESP-r model in a folder (as named in the META file) and\
if you attempt to load it it might complain about not finding databases but would\
otherwise hold the geometry and most of the attribution of the model.  \
\
If the META file includes directives for names of databases then the conversion will attempt to create the zone construction files.  If there are no directives then the default databases will be assumed.  You may be asked to confirm the construction attributes of surfaces.\
\
Currently the extracted model will not include a zone control file or shading files as the META file format does not yet include directives for control or the re-creation of zone shading files.  The file format continues to evolve and expand. Please check the documentation and examples in this folder.\
\
}